Part 2 of Getting Started with K8s (#3664)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/getting-started-with-k8s-part2/index.md

---
title: "Getting Started With Kubernetes: Application Basics"
date: 2020-06-30
meta_desc: "A tutorial for getting started with Kubernetes using Infrastructure as Code."
meta_image: getting-started.png
authors:
    - sophia-parafina
tags:
    - Kubernetes

---

Welcome to the second article in a series using infrastructure as code to deploy applications with Kubernetes. The series walks you through building a Kubernetes cluster on cloud providers, deploying applications, and “Day 2” activities such as migrating Node groups. In the [previous article]({{< relref "/blog/getting-started-with-k8s-part1" >}}), we showed how to create a Kubernetes cluster for AWS, Azure, and GCP. In this installment, we’ll learn how to deploy an application using Kubernetes objects.

<!--more-->

> Kubernetes is complex, but it’s important to keep in mind that Kubernetes is not merely a container orchestrator. It is designed to keep applications highly available and to scale on demand. It accomplishes this by running multiple instances of application containers and replacing them as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes has a rich feature set and it is important to keep in mind that Kubernetes is not merely a container orchestrator. It is designed to keep applications highly available and to scale on demand. It accomplishes this by running multiple instances of application containers and replacing them as needed.
```

There are many moving parts to Kubernetes, so let’s review the objects used to deploy applications in Kubernetes.

## Pods

A Pod is where applications run, and it is the smallest unit of execution for Kubernetes. A Pod hosts one or more containers that make up a complete application. For example, a Pod can have a container running an entire LAMP stack for a web application, or it can run a container with NGINX that connects to a database running in another Pod.

Each Pod has an IP address and can address other Pods in the same network. In the previous article, we deployed clusters in a VPC. Pods deployed in a Kubernetes cluster can communicate with each other via TCP/IP. Containers within a Pod share, e.g., think of containers as a process, share the same IP address and port space, and can communicate via localhost or IPC, such as POSIX shared memory or SystemV semaphores.

> Pods have a specific [lifecycle](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/Pods/Pod-lifecycle/). They are created, assigned a UID, and scheduled to run on a Node, and run until they either fail or are terminated. When a Node dies, Pods are deleted and replaced. Pods have five distinct states or phases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pods have a specific [lifecycle](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/Pods/Pod-lifecycle/). They are created, assigned a UID, scheduled to run on a Node, and run until they either fail or are terminated. When a Node dies, Pods are deleted and replaced onto other nodes. Pods have five distinct states or phases:
```

- *Pending*  The Pod has been scheduled for creation, but one or more containers have not been created.
- *Running*  The Pod has been created in the Node, all containers have been created, and at least one container is running.
- *Succeeded* All the containers have been successfully terminated and will not be restarted.
- *Failed* All containers have been terminated, but at least one container has exited with a failed non-zero status.
- *Unknown* The state of the Pod was not returned, possibly due to a communication error.

When deploying an application, you can see the status of the Pods.

> ![Deployment](kubectl-Pod-status.gif)

Reviewer 2: GIF seems like it's missing in the preview

Author: tyoe

## Services

> A Service is a logical set of loosely coupled dependent Pods that routes traffic between them. For example, your application may deploy a web application, a data store for queued requests, and an RDBMS for customer data in separate Pods. A Service groups Pods using [Labels and LabelSelectors](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/). Labels are key/value pairs you can use to identify objects meaningfully. Using the example above, the web application may be labeled `”tier” : ”frontend”` and the database would be labeled `”tier” : :backend”`. Labels aren’t unique, and objects can have the same label. A LabelSelector identifies a set of objects and is a way to group objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Service routes traffic to a logical set of Pods. For example, your application may deploy a web application, a data store for queued requests, and an RDBMS for customer data in separate Pods. A Service groups Pods using [Labels and LabelSelectors](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/). Labels are key/value pairs that you can use to identify objects meaningfully. Using the example above, the web application may be labeled `tier : frontend` and the database would be labeled `tier : backend`. Labels aren’t unique, and objects can have the same label. A LabelSelector identifies a set of objects and is a way to group objects.
```

> Pod IPs are not exposed to traffic outside of the cluster. Applications require a Service to receive traffic, and by setting a ServiceSpec, they can be addressable by specifying a type in the ServiceSpec:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pod IPs are not exposed to traffic outside of the cluster. Applications require a Service to receive traffic, and by setting a ServiceSpec, they can be addressable by specifying a type:
```

- ClusterIP (default) -The Service is only addressable from within the cluster.

> - NodePort - The Service is available outside the cluster using <NodeIP>:<NodePort>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- NodePort - In addition to a ClusterIP, the Service is also available outside the cluster using `<NodeIP>:<NodePort>`.
```

> - LoadBalancer - Uses a load balancer to assign a fixed, external IP to the Service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- LoadBalancer - In addition to a Cluster IP and Node Port, the Service is also assigned a load balancer to with a fixed, external IP that routes to the Service.
```

> - ExternalName - Uses a CNAME record set by *externalName* to expose a Service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ExternalName - Uses a CNAME record to internally expose an external Service to Kubernetes within the cluster.
```

## Volumes

Containers are ephemeral, and storage in a container is temporary as well. As soon as a container stops, any changes are lost. The lifecycle of a Kubernetes Volume is tied to a Pod, and the data in the volume is available across container restarts. If a Pod is terminated, then the data will also be lost.

Kubernetes supports many types of [volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#types-of-volumes), but of interest are *PersistentVolumes*, which persist beyond the lifecycle of a Pod. PersistentVolumes are a resource that has been provisioned by a [Storage Class](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/). To use a PersistentVolume, we have to declare a PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) which allows a user to access abstract storage resources. We can declare parameters such as size, access (read/write), or volume expansion for a PVC. Applications that require a PVC are typically data stores or databases where data must be preserved outside the scope of the application in a Pod.

## Namespaces

> One of the advantages of Kubernetes is multi-tenancy or the ability to host many virtual clusters in the same physical cluster. Namespaces are used to organize application clusters by providing scope for names. To this end, Namespaces must be unique, cannot be nested inside another namespace, and resources can only belong to one namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the advantages of Kubernetes is multi-tenancy or the ability to host many virtual clusters in the same physical cluster. Namespaces are used to organize application clusters by providing scope for names. To this end, Namespaces must be unique, cannot be nested inside another namespace, and resources can only belong to one namespace, if they are namespaced.
```

Namespaces are typically used where there are multiple teams or projects. For example, you may have an *engineering* and a *marketing* namespace. However, it’s more efficient to use labels if the applications are only slightly different than in grouping environments such as dev, test, and prod.

## Controllers

> Controllers manage the state of the cluster by making changes that move the cluster to the desired state. They watch resources making sure that objects, such as Pods, meet the spec for the declared state. The [kube-controller-manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-controller-manager/) in the control plane Node has a built-in set of controllers. Let’s take a look at two commonly used controllers, Deployments and ReplicaSets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Controllers manage the state of the cluster by making changes that move the cluster to the desired state. They watch resources making sure that objects, such as Pods, meet the spec for the declared state. The [kube-controller-manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-controller-manager/) in the control plane has a built-in set of controllers. Let’s take a look at two commonly used controllers, Deployments and ReplicaSets.
```

A Deployment is a higher-level object that manages declarative updates for Pods and ReplicaSets. But first, let’s look at ReplicaSets, which are a set of Pods running the same application at any given time. As such, it is often used to guarantee the availability of a specified number of identical Pods. A ReplicaSet creates and deletes Pods as needed to meet the criteria of the declared state, and uses Labels and Selectors to determine which Pods to manage.

> A Deployment is a higher-level abstraction that manages ReplicaSets by updating Pods. Deployments are commonly used instead of directly using ReplicaSets because the Deployment controller manages updates to the desired state at a controlled rate. For example, you can specify a Rolling Update to limit the downtime of an application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Deployment is a higher-level abstraction that manages ReplicaSets by updating Pods. Deployments are commonly used instead of directly using ReplicaSets because the Deployment controller manages updates to the desired state at a controlled rate. For example, you can specify a rolling update to limit the downtime of an application.
```

## Examples

Now that we have the basic Kubernetes objects, let's see how they are used in a Kubernetes deployment across cloud providers.

> {{< chooser cloud "aws,azure,gcp" >}}

Reviewer 2: The example is not showing up for GCP, and the Azure one is slightly off in parity w.r.t comments and repeat sections of prose & code after the YAML comparison.

Also, the major diff between all 3 should be the last line:

`export const serviceHostname = service.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname;` where for AWS its `.hostname` but Azure and GCP it is `.ip`

{{% choosable cloud aws %}}
In this example, we’ll deploy Nginx. We’ll skip the cluster creation, which we covered in the previous installment. We set *name* to `helloworld` and use it to set the Namespace for the application and the Label (*appLabel*). The Deployment uses these parameters in the metadata section.

> The *spec* section of a Deployment specifies the desired state; in this example, we want one Replica, and the selector must match *appLabel*. The Deployment spec includes the application container and claims port:80 on the Pod. To make our deployment available outside the cluster, we create a LoadBalancer service that routes requests to the container. As with the Deployment, we add the Labels and Namespace to the metadata. The Service spec sets the *type* to LoadBalance and opens port 80 externally. Note that the selector uses appLabels to acquire the Pods from our Deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The *spec* section of a Deployment specifies the desired state; in this example, we want one Replica, and the selector must match *appLabel*. The Deployment spec includes the application container and claims port 80 on the Pod. To make our deployment available outside the cluster, we create a LoadBalancer service that routes requests to the container. As with the Deployment, we add the Labels and Namespace to the metadata. The Service spec sets the *type* to LoadBalance and opens port 80 externally. Note that the selector uses appLabels to acquire the Pods from our Deployment.
```
